---
title: "Tracking senescence‐induced patterns in leaf litter leachate using parallel factor analysis (PARAFAC) modeling and self‐organizing maps"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2009-10-01-paper-title-number-1
excerpt: ''
date: 2017-09-05
venue: 'Journal of Geophysical Research- Biogeosciences'
paperurl: 'https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdfdirect/10.1002/2016JG003677'
citation: 'K.I. Wheeler, D.F. Levia, J.E. Hudson (2017). &quot;Tracking senescence-induced patterns in leaf litter leachate using parallel factor analysis modeling (PARAFAC) and self-organizing maps.&quot; <i>Journal of Geophysical Research- Biogeosciences</i> 122(9):2233-2250.' 
---
In autumn, the dissolved organic matter (DOM) contribution of leaf litter leachate to streams in forested watersheds changes as trees undergo resorption, senescence, and leaf abscission. Despite its biogeochemical importance, little work has investigated how leaf litter leachate DOM changes throughout autumn and how any changes might differ interspecifically and intraspecifically. Since climate change is expected to cause vegetation migration, it is necessary to learn how changes in forest composition could affect DOM inputs via leaf litter leachate. We examined changes in leaf litter leachate fluorescent DOM (FDOM) from American beech (Fagus grandifolia Ehrh.) leaves in Maryland, Rhode Island, Vermont, and North Carolina and from yellow poplar (Liriodendron tulipifera L.) leaves from Maryland. FDOM in leachate samples was characterized by excitation-emission matrices (EEMs). A six-component parallel factor analysis (PARAFAC) model was created to identify components that accounted for the majority of the variation in the data set. Self-organizing maps (SOM) compared the PARAFAC component proportions of leachate samples. Phenophase and species exerted much stronger influence on the determination of a sample’s SOM placement than geographic origin. As expected, FDOM from all trees transitioned from more protein-like components to more humic-like components with senescence. Percent greenness of sampled leaves and the proportion of tyrosine-like component 1 were found to be significantly different between the two genetic beech clusters, suggesting differences in photosynthesis and resorption. Our results highlight the need to account for interspecific and intraspecific variations in leaf litter leachate FDOM throughout autumn when examining the influence of allochthonous inputs to streams.
